## A Brief Historical Outline

_[Note: as customary, all dates Gregorian]_

The world of the Circumpolar is the product of a tumultuous period in history. This period is generally taken by historians to begin with 2000, when the prospects of diminishing availability of energy (and, secondarily, other resources) were beginning to be acknowledged by a significant fraction of the Waster populations of Earth; and the early onset of global warming was evident.

The period was dominated by five overarching historical and human ecological trends:

1. The decline of the imperial powers of the Waster years.

2. Rapid global reduction in human populations.

3. Climate-driven migrations.

4. Ecological damage to oceanic as well as landmass systems.

5. The development of the elements - ideological/religious, political, ecological, and mental - of Successor civilization.

These five trends proceeded more or less in tandem, each advancing in punctuated equilibrium, each affecting the others.

### Imperial Collapse: the end of the Waster civilizations

The 20th century, in retrospect, is generally considered to be the ultimate expression of Waster forms of civilization. Historians disagree on more than a few attributes of Waster existence, for two reasons. 

The first reason is the damage done to the historical record, compounded by the methodical work of centuries of salvage which has gone a long way towards eradicating archaeological evidence. A subtle point here is that Waster civilization supported an unthinkably vast number of people, linked by extremely numerous, inexpensive, facile channels of communication - many of which left no tangible traces. The sheer amount of information generated by Wasters will surely never again be equalled; and such bits and pieces as remain are only small and not necessarily systematic glimpses. This point is somewhat mitigated by the Late Wasters' awareness of this point; for reasons spanning a range of sentiments, from collective egotism to sincere appreciation of what their civilization had been able to achieve, the Wasters did provide deliberate troves of information which have aided the task of the historian immeasurably. OF course, these reliquaries were subject to cultural biases and ideological distortions of every description; still, we have been able to construct something of a picture. The picture, however, remains very uncertain.

The second reason for historical disagreement about Waster times and peoples is the linguistic difficulty. Of all languages and writing systems prevalent in Waster times, Icelandic is one of the few that has survived in anything like its original form. Linguistic churn is still a serious issue in the modern world; translations are probably all flawed in ways we can seldom truly understand. Without contextual understanding of the dead languages in which surviving historical source documents are written, substantial misinterpretations are inevitable.

With these caveats in mind, here is a synopsis of our best understanding of the decline and fall of Waster civilization.

#### 

### Human Depopulation

The most significant dynamics in this are 

 - the pandemics of the 21st century; and 

 - famine, driven by the double engine of climate change and energy resource collapse.

There were also significant effects based on warfare, but warfare itself was not really a primary cause of population decline. The wars of the 21st and 22nd centuries did inflict severe knock-on effects, intensifying the population declines induced by deprivation and disease.

The initial pandemics were wet firecrackers in epidemiological effect: the Ebola outbreak of 2014-18 and the Avian Flu outbreak in 2017 

These were of course system dynamics, hence difficult to analyze in any kind of isolation. However, here's how it apparently went.

Pan

### The Nine Great Migrations

It&apos;s not entirely easy to assign a structure and classification to the huge movements of peoples across the globe. For one thing, the migrations were not conveniently tidy, with simple beginnings and ends. For another, the migrations were in most cases subject to complexity of fine structure: the largest migrations are usually the net effect of smaller movements, which were in turn the result of still smaller events and trends, and so on.

Another complexity is the venerable historical tradition of migrations begetting migrations begetting migrations. In early historical times, this happened pretty commonly in Central Asia: when the nomadic peoples of the east gained political unity, they tended to push westward into the better grazing lands. The nomads thus displaced tended to push westward in turn, and so on. Further complicating this scenario is of course the "pick-up band" phenomenon: the vanguard of invasion was always a polyglot, multiethnic force coalescing out of alliances and political acquisition. Genghis Khan&apos;s Horde was by no means predominantly Mongol by the time of its westward encounter with European and Mediterranean civilizations. 

Finally, the migrations of the 21st - 24th centuries were not conveniently demarcated instances of whole populations deciding _en masse_ to up sticks and move. In many cases, what we call "migrations" were actually instances of cultural colonization, in which the most vigorous - or, as often happened, the most desperate - elements of the migrating population moved, strongly affecting the cultures and languages of the lands to which they relocated. (Examples of this were the "Aztlan" colonization of the United States and the Fheen Caliphate in Europe. As a strong counterexample to this general principle, the Chinese movement into Siberia displaced the local inhabitants fairly completely.)

The following list of "Nine Great Migrations" is proposed in full awareness of the foregoing caveats.

* The Japanese Diaspora to the western and polar North American seaboard

* The East Asian oceanic migrations

* The Aztlan migrations

* The Caliphate of Fheen

* The Chinese migration into Siberia

* The colonization of Antarctica

* The push of equatorial South Americans into the Mato Grosso

* The African transatlantic migrations

* The Central African migrations to South Africa






### The Dying Ecologies

### Successor Civilization

The most important point about the emergence of Successor civilizations is that those civilizations were no more monolithic in political, linguistic, and social terms than the Industrial civilization that preceded them. 

However, global Industrial civilization did, around the turn of the 20th-21st century, achieve an almost complete ideological domination of the human race: whether a society numbered among the haves or the have-nots, it tended to accept the basic premises of industrial civilization.

It's probably worth explicitly stating these premises in their historical context.

#### Premises of Industrial Civilization

 - __Human ingenuity is the ur-good in economics:__ The economic maxim that _all goods are substitutable_ logically requires a non-substitutable "primary good" that cannot be replaced. In physical reality, this is generally recognized as Energy; the Waster concept was _human ingenuity_, a concept of 

 - __Economic "externalities" are not significant:__

 - __Industrial civilization has attained an historical phase-change that can be perpetuated:__
 




